Continuous profiler - documentation (#3219)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet-instrumentation: docs/internal/continuous-profiler.md

> # Continuous profiler

Reviewer: Can we tell a bit more about what the continuous profiler collects or accomplishes before starting with thread sampling?

Author: Something like https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet-instrumentation/pull/3219/files#r1448765491 ?

> [!IMPORTANT]  
> Continuous profiler is an experimental feature. It will be subject to change,
> when <https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/239> or <https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/237>
> are merged.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Continuous profiler collects stack traces from the processes for two type of events

* periodically, for all threads -- see thread sampling,
* for memory allocation events -- see memory allocation.

Stack traces can be exported to observability back end that supports profiling.

```

Reviewer: Nice! A small rewording:

```suggestion
The continuous profiler collects stack traces from the processes for two type of events:
	
	* Periodically, for all threads. See Thread sampling.
	* Memory allocation events. See Memory allocation.
	
You can export stack traces to any observability back end that supports profiling.
```

If you'd add anchor links in each bullet point, that'd be fantastic!

> > will be ready and merged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> are merged.
```

## Thread sampling

> Thread sampling can be enabled by the custom plugin.
> Plugin is responsible for parsing dense, data format and exporting it in
> the appropriate format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can enable thread sampling using the custom plugin, which
can parse dense thread sampling data and export it in a format that
is compatible with OpenTelemetry.
```

Reviewer: I've updated my suggestion to make it less specific.

### How does the thread sampler work?

> The profiler leverages [.NET profiling](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/framework/unmanaged-api/profiling/)
> to perform periodic call stack sampling. For every sampling period, the runtime
>  suspended and the samples for all managed thread are saved into the buffer,
>  then the runtime resumes.
> 
> The separate managed-thread is processing data from the buffer and export it
> the way defined by the plugin.
> 
> To make the process more efficient, the sampler uses two independent buffers to
> store samples alternatively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The profiler uses the
[.NET profiler](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/framework/unmanaged-api/profiling/)
to perform periodic call stack sampling. For every sampling period, the runtime
suspends execution and the samples for all managed thread are saved in the buffer,
then the runtime resumes.

The separate managed thread processes data from the buffer and exports it
in the format defined by the plugin. To make the process more efficient, the
sampler uses two independent buffers to store samples alternatively.
```

How long does runtime suspension last? Does it affect application performance significantly?

Author: Based on logs I have checked, for simple application it is ~150microseconds. It is vary based on the application size, machine, etc.

* .NET 6.0 or higher (`ICorProfilerInfo12` available in runtime).
* .NET Framework is not supported, as `ICorProfiler10` and `ICorProfiler12`
  are not available in .NET Fx.

Note that `ICorProfiler10` can be used, but .NET Core 3.1 or .NET 5.0 aren't
supported by the OpenTelemetry .NET Automatic Instrumentation.

### Enable the profiler

> Implement custom plugin.

Author: ```suggestion
Implement custom plugin. See plugin section.
```

> * .NET 6.0 or higher (`ICorProfilerInfo12` available in runtime). Technically
>   it could be `ICorProfiler10`, and .NET Core 3.1/.NET 5.0, but these versions
>   are not supported by OpenTelemetry .NET AutoInstrumentation.
> * .NET Framework is not supported. `ICorProfiler10` nor `ICorProfiler12`
>   are not available in .NET Fx.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* .NET 6.0 or higher (`ICorProfilerInfo12` available in runtime).
* .NET Framework is not supported, as `ICorProfiler10` and `ICorProfiler12`
  are not available in .NET Fx.

Note that `ICorProfiler10`  and .NET Core 3.1 or .NET 5.0 are not supported
by the OpenTelemetry .NET Automatic Instrumentation.
```

Reviewer: Do we expect folks to use ICorProfiler10 despite the versions it comes within being not supported?

Author: More like:

```
Note that `ICorProfiler10` could be supported, but .NET Core 3.1 or .NET 5.0 aren't
by the OpenTelemetry .NET Automatic Instrumentation.
```

Reviewer: Suggestion updated!

> Implement custom plugin.

Reviewer: How do you do that?

Author: See plugin section.

> ### Configuration settings by plugin
> 
> * `threadSamplingEnabled = true;`
> * `var threadSamplingInterval = 10000u;` // in ms. Splunk is using 10000.
>   There is no possibility to set value lower than 1000.
> * `var exportInterval = TimeSpan.FromMilliseconds(500);` // Interval to read data
>   from buffers and call exporter, common for Thread and Allocation sampling
> * `object continuousProfilerExporter = new ConsoleExporter();` // Exporter,
>   common for Thread and Allocation sampling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configuration defaults

* `threadSamplingEnabled = true;`: Enables thread sampling.
* `var threadSamplingInterval = 10000u;`: Sampling interval, in milliseconds. Lowest possible value is 1000.
* `var exportInterval = TimeSpan.FromMilliseconds(500);`: Interval for reading the data from buffers and call the exporter. This setting is common for both thread and allocation sampling.
* `object continuousProfilerExporter = new ConsoleExporter();`: Exporter to be used for both thread and allocation sampling.
```

It's defaults as set by the plugin, right?

Author: Plugin author manage the default values. There is no guards in the OTel AutoInsturmentation

### Escape hatch

The profiler limits its own behavior when both buffers used to store sampled
data are full.

This scenario might happen when the data processing thread is not able
to export data the given period of time.

> Thread sampler will resume when any of the buffers are empty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thread sampling resumes when any of the buffers are empty.
```

> ### Troubleshooting the .NET profiler

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Troubleshoot the .NET profiler
```

#### How do I know if it's working?

> At the startup, the SignalFx Instrumentation for .NET logs the string
> `ContinuousProfiler::StartThreadSampling` at `info` log level.

Author: ```suggestion
At startup, the OpenTelemetry Instrumentation for .NET logs the string
`ContinuousProfiler::StartThreadSampling` at `info` log level.
```

> At the startup, the SignalFx Instrumentation for .NET logs the string
> `ContinuousProfiler::StartThreadSampling` at `info` log level.
> 
> You can grep for this in the native logs for the instrumentation
> to see something like this:
> 
> ```text
> 10/12/22 12:10:31.962 PM [12096|22036] [info] ContinuousProfiler::StartThreadSampling
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At startup, the OpenTelemetry Instrumentation for .NET logs the string
`ContinuousProfiler::StartThreadSampling` at `info` log level.

You can grep for this in the native logs for the instrumentation
to see something like this:

```text
10/12/22 12:10:31.962 PM [12096|22036] [info] ContinuousProfiler::StartThreadSampling
```
```

> #### How can I see Continuous Profiling configuration?
> 
> The OpenTelemetry .NET AutomaticInstrumentation logs the profiling configuration
> at `Debug` log level during the startup. You can grep for the string
> `Continuous profiling configuration:` to see the configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### How can I see Continuous Profiling configuration?

The OpenTelemetry .NET Automatic Instrumentation logs the profiling configuration
at `Debug` log level during the startup. You can grep for the string
`Continuous profiling configuration:` to see the configuration.
```

#### What does the escape hatch do?

The escape hatch automatically discards profiling data
if the ingest limit has been reached.

If the escape hatch activates, it logs the following message:

```text
Skipping a thread sample period, buffers are full.
```

You can also look for:

```text
** THIS WILL RESULT IN LOSS OF PROFILING DATA **.
```

If you see these log messages, check the exporter implementation.

#### What if I'm on an unsupported .NET version?

None of the .NET Framework versions is supported. You have to switch

> to supported .NET version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to a supported .NET version.
```

#### Can I tell the sampler to ignore some threads?

There is no such functionality. All managed threads are captured by the profiler.

## Allocation sampling

The profiler samples allocations, captures the call stack state for the .NET

> thread that triggered the allocation, and exporting it in appropriate format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
thread that triggered the allocation, and exports it in the appropriate format.
```

Use the memory allocation data, together with the stack traces and .NET runtime
metrics, to investigate memory leaks and unusual consumption patterns

> in Continuous Profiling.

Reviewer: Would that be Splunk's AlwaysOn Profiling? Since we're upstream, let's change that to:

```suggestion
in an observability back end that supports profiling.
```

### How does the memory profiler work?

The profiler leverages [.NET profiling](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/framework/unmanaged-api/profiling/)
to perform allocation sampling.
For every sampled allocation, allocation amount together with stack trace of
the thread that triggered the allocation, and associated span context, are saved
into buffer.

The managed thread shared with CPU Profiler processes the data from the buffer

> and exports in the way defined by the plugin..

Reviewer: I think this is repeated in the intro and can go.

Author: You are right, I would keep the allocation and thread sampling a bit duplicated. I think it is fine.

#### How do I know if it's working?

At the startup, the OpenTelemetry .NET Automatic Instrumentation will log the string
`ContinuousProfiler::MemoryProfiling started` at `info` log level.

You can grep for this in the native logs for the instrumentation
to see something like this:

```text
10/12/23 12:10:31.962 PM [12096|22036] [info] ContinuousProfiler::MemoryProfiling started.
```

#### How can I see Continuous Profiling configuration?

The OpenTelemetry .NET AutomaticInstrumentation logs the profiling configuration
at `Debug` log level during the startup. You can grep for the string
`Continuous profiling configuration:` to see the configuration.

#### What does the escape hatch do?

The escape hatch automatically discards captured allocation data
if the ingest limit has been reached.

If the escape hatch activates, it logs the following message:

`Discarding captured allocation sample. Allocation buffer is full.`

If you see these log messages, check the configuration and communication layer
between your process and the Collector.

#### What if I'm on an unsupported .NET version?

None of the .NET Framework versions is supported. You have to switch to
supported .NET version.

> ## Plugin

Reviewer: This is all dupe?

    object continuousProfilerExporter = new ConsoleExporter();
    return Tuple.Create(threadSamplingEnabled, threadSamplingInterval, allocationSamplingEnabled, maxMemorySamplesPerMinute, exportInterval, continuousProfilerExporter);
}
```

if more than one plugin implement `GetContinuousProfilerConfiguration` only
the first one will be used. Other will be ignored.

### Exporter contract

Two methods has to be implemented by Exporter

```csharp
public void ExportThreadSamples(byte[] buffer, int read);
public void ExportAllocationSamples(byte[] buffer, int read);
```

Both accept buffer produced by the native code together with the length of filled
data. The Exporter is responsible both for parsing this buffer and exporting it.

Example: ConsoleExporter in this PR.

### Native parser

As there is no default OpenTelemetry Protocol format there is not easy way to
create good contract between OpenTelemetry Automatic Instrumentation and
the plugin. The plugin has to implement (copy) our version of the parser.
It should be changed when the OTel Proposal will be merged, and we can start implementing
real OTLP exporter.

> Implementation can be found in `SampleNativeFormatParser` class in this PR.

Reviewer: How is one supposed to use this information?

Author: Fixed in fb8de31a824fd491f737cdcb89656d99ab04190d. This PR should be merged after #3196

> Implementation can be found in `SampleNativeFormatParser` class in this PR.

Author: ```suggestion
Implementation can be found in `SampleNativeFormatParser` class in this repository.
```
